Babbitt, Natalie. The Search for Delicious. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1969. (1969)
From the Prologue
There was a time once when the earth was still very young, a time some call the oldest days. This was long before
there were any people about to dig parts of it up and cut parts of it off. People came along much later, building their
towns and castles (which nearly always fell down after a while) and plaguing each other with quarrels and supper parties.
The creatures who lived on earth in that early time stayed each in his own place and kept it beautiful. There were
dwarfs in the mountains, woldwellers in the forests, mermaids in the lakes, and, of course, winds in the air.
There was one particular spot on the earth where a ring of mountains enclosed a very dry and dusty place. There
were winds and dwarfs there, but no mermaids because there weren’t any lakes, and there were no woldwellers either
because forests couldn’t grow in so dry a place.
Then a remarkable thing happened. Up in the mountains one day a dwarf was poking about with a sharp tool, looking
for a good spot to begin mining. He poked and poked until he had made a very deep hole in the earth. Then he poked
again and clear spring water came spurting up in the hole. He hurried in great excitement to tell the other dwarfs and
they all came running to see the water. They were so pleased that they built over it a fine house of heavy stones and
they made a special door out of a flat rock and balanced it in its place very carefully on carved hinges. Then one of
them made a whistle out of a small stone which blew a certain very high note tuned to just the right warble so that
when you blew it, the door of the rock house would open, and when you blew it again, the door would shut. They
took turns being in charge of the whistle and they worked hard to keep the spring clean and beautiful.
Yes, ma’am.”
She said, “I’m sure you’ll both be very happy.”
Me and Jerry looked at each other.
The woman said, “Now, now, boys, no need to look so glum, I know you don’t understand what it means, but there’s a
depression going on all over this country. People can’t find jobs and these are very, very difficult times for everybody.
We’ve been lucky enough to find two wonderful families who’ve opened their doors for you. I think it’s best that we
show our new foster families that we’re very…”
She dragged out the word very, waiting for us to finish her sentence for her.
Jerry said, “Cheerful, helpful and grateful.” I moved my lips and mumbled.
She smiled and said, “Unfortunately, you won’t have time for breakfast. I’ll have a couple of pieces of fruit put in a bag.
In the meantime go to the sleep room and strip your beds and gather all of your things.”
Here we go again. I felt like I was walking in my sleep as I followed Jerry back to the room where all the boys’ beds
were jim-jammed together. This was the third foster home I was going to and I’m used to packing up and leaving, but
it still surprises me that there are always a few seconds, right after they tell you you’ve got to go, when my nose gets
all runny and my throat gets all choky and my eyes get all sting-y. But the tears coming out doesn’t happen to me
anymore, I don’t know when it first happened, but is seems like my eyes don’t cry anymore.