Polyphemus threw down his pile of wood. As it crashed to the ground, Odysseus and his men fled to the darkest
corners of the cave.
Unaware that the Greeks were hiding inside, Polyphemus drove his animals into the cave. Then he rolled a huge boulder
over its mouth to block out the light of day and imprison his flock inside.
Twenty-four wagons could not haul that rock away, Odysseus thought desperately. How will we escape this monster?
Odysseus’ men trembled with terror as the giant made a small fire and milked his goats in the shadowy light. His milking
done, he threw more wood on his fire. The flame blazed brightly, lighting up the corners of the cave where Odysseus
and his men were hiding.
“What’s this? Who are you? From where do you come?” the giant boomed. He glared at the Greeks with his single
eye. “Are you pirates who steal the treasure of others?”
Odysseus’ men were frozen with terror. But Odysseus hid his own fear and stepped toward the monster.
“We are not pirates,” he said, “We are Greeks blown off course by storm winds. Will you offer us the gift of hospitality
like a good host? If you do, mighty Zeus, king of the gods, will be pleased. Zeus is the guardian of all strangers.”
“Fool!” the giant growled. “Who are you to tell me to please Zeus? I am a son of Poseidon, god of the seas! I am not
afraid of Zeus!”
Odysseus men cowered in fear.
Polyphemus moved closer to Odysseus. He spoke in a soft, terrible voice. “But tell me, stranger, where is your ship?
Near or far from shore?”
Odysseus knew Polyphemus was trying to trap him. “Our ship was destroyed in the storm,” he lied. “It was dashed
against the rocks. With these good men I escaped, I ask you again, will you welcome us?”
Cowgirl Kate smiled. “Then I will tell you a story.”
“Once there was a cowgirl who needed a cowhorse. She went to a ranch and saw lots and lots of horses. Then she
saw a horse whose coat was the color of chocolate. His tail and mane were the color of caramel. ‘Yum,’ said the cowgirl,
‘you are the colors of my favorite candy.’ The horse looked at her. He sniffed her.”
“’Are you a real cowgirl?’ he asked. ‘I am a cowgirl from the boots up,’ she said. ‘Well, I am a cowhorse from the mane
down,’ he said. ‘Will you work hard every day?’ the cowgirl asked.. The horse raised his head high. ‘Of course,’ he
said, ‘a cowhorse always does his job.’ ‘At last,’ said the cowgirl, ‘I have found my horse.’”
“That was a good story,” said Cocoa. He raised his head high. “And now I am ready to herd cows.”