From Scene 5
TOM: What are you doing?
AMANDA: I’m brushing that cowlick down! [She attacks his hair with the brush.] What is this young man’s position at
the warehouse?
TOM [submitting grimly to the brush and interrogation]: This young man’s position is that of a shipping clerk, Mother.
AMANDA: Sounds to me like a fairly responsible job, the sort of a job you would be in if you had more get-up. What is
his salary? Have you any idea?
TOM: I would judge it to be approximately eighty-five dollars a month.
AMANDA: Well—not princely—but—
TOM: Twenty more than I make.
AMANDA: Yes, how well I know! But for a family man, eighty-five dollars a month is not much more than you can just
get by on....
TOM: Yes, but Mr. O’Connor is not a family man.
AMANDA: He might be, mightn’t he? Some time in the future?
TOM: I see. Plans and provisions.
AMANDA: You are the only young man that I know of who ignores the fact that the future becomes the present, the
present the past, and the past turns into everlasting regret if you don’t plan for it!
TOM: I will think that over and see what I can make of it.
AMANDA: Don’t be supercilious with your mother! Tell me some more about this—what do you call him?
TOM: James D. O’Connor. The D. is for Delaney.
AMANDA: Irish on both sides! Gracious! And doesn’t drink?
TOM: Shall I call him up and ask him right this minute?
AMANDA: The only way to find out about those things is to make discreet inquiries at the proper moment. When
I was a girl in Blue Mountain and it was suspected that a young man drank, the girl whose attentions he had been
receiving, if any girl was, would sometimes speak to the minister of his church, or rather her father would if her father
was living, and sort of feel him out on the young man’s character. That is the way such things are discreetly handled
to keep a young woman from making a tragic mistake!
TOM: Then how did you happen to make a tragic mistake?
AMANDA: That innocent look of your father’s had everyone fooled! He smiled—the world was enchanted! No girl can
do worse than put herself at the mercy of a handsome appearance! I hope that Mr. O’Connor is not too good-looking.