Mark, Jan. The Museum Book: A Guide to Strange and Wonderful Collections. Illustrated by Richard Holland.
Cambridge, Mass.: Candlewick, 2007. (2007)
From Chapter One
Suppose you went into a museum and you didn’t know what it was. Imagine: it’s raining, there’s a large building
nearby with an open door, and you don’t have to pay to go in. It looks like an ancient Greek temple. Temples are
places of worship, so you’d better go in quietly.
But inside it doesn’t seem much like any temple or mosque or church you have ever been in. That is, it looks like all of
them, but the furniture is out of place. Perhaps it’s a hotel; it has fifty rooms, but there is only one bed, although it is
a very splendid bed. Apparently Queen Elizabeth I slept in it. Or perhaps there are fifty beds, but they are all in one
room and you can’t sleep in any of them. There are red velvet ropes to keep you out.
Farther down the corridor you notice a steam locomotive. It’s a train station! But there is no track except for a few
yards that the engine is resting on, and already you have seen something else. Across the hall is a totem pole that
goes right up to the roof, standing next to a Viking ship. Beyond it is a room full of glass cases displaying rocks, more
kinds of rocks than you ever knew existed, from diamonds to meteorites. From where you are standing, you can see
into the next room, where the glass cases are full of stuffed fish; and the next, which is lined with shelves of Roman
pottery; and the next, which is crowded with birds; and after that, lions and giraffes and pandas and whales.
It must be a zoo.
[…]
Just then you see someone walking toward you who isn’t dead—you hope. He is wearing a uniform with a badge on it
that reads Guide.
“Enjoying yourself?” he says.
You say, “Where did you get all this stuff?”
“All?” he says. “These are just the things we show to the public. Down in the basement there’s a hundred thousand
times more. Do you know,” he murmurs, “we’ve got twenty-seven two-headed sheep?”
“But why?” you ask. “Why do you have any two-headed sheep.
“Because people give them to us,” he says. “And so that you can look at them. Where else would you see one?
Where else would you be able to see the mummy case of King Tutankhamun, the first plane to fly the Atlantic, the
first train engine, the last dodo, a diplodocus, the astrolabe of Ahmad of Isfahan (an example of the oldest scientific
instrument in the world), chicken-skin gloves, the lantern carried by Guy Fawkes when he went to blow up the British
Parliament buildings, a murderer’s trigger finger—?”
“But where am I?” you say. “What is this place?”
And he says, “It’s a museum.”