From Act II, Part 2
Cecily [rather shy and confidingly]: Dearest Gwendolen, there is no reason why I should make a secret of it to you.
Our little county newspaper is sure to chronicle the fact next week. Mr. Ernest Worthing and I are engaged to be married.
Gwendolen [quite politely, rising]: My darling Cecily, I think there must be some slight error. Mr. Ernest Worthing is
engaged to me. The announcement will appear in the Morning Post on Saturday at the latest.
Cecily [very politely, rising]: I am afraid you must be under some misconception. Ernest proposed to me exactly ten
minutes ago. [Shows diary.]
Gwendolen [examines diary through her lorgnettte carefully]: It is certainly very curious, for he asked me to be his
wife yesterday afternoon at 5.30. If you would care to verify the incident, pray do so. [Produces diary of her own.] I
never travel without my diary. One should always have something sensational to read in the train. I am so sorry, dear
Cecily, if it is any disappointment to you, but I am afraid I have the prior claim.
Cecily: It would distress me more than I can tell you, dear Gwendolen, if it caused you any mental or physical anguish,
but I feel bound to point out that since Ernest proposed to you he clearly has changed his mind.
Gwendolen [meditatively]: If the poor fellow has been entrapped into any foolish promise I shall consider it my duty
to rescue him at once, and with a firm hand.
Cecily [thoughtfully and sadly]: Whatever unfortunate entanglement my dear boy may have got into, I will never
reproach him with it after we are married.
Gwendolen: Do you allude to me, Miss Cardew, as an entanglement? You are presumptuous. On an occasion of this
kind it becomes more than a moral duty to speak one’s mind. It becomes a pleasure.
Cecily: Do you suggest, Miss Fairfax, that I entrapped Ernest into an engagement? How dare you? This is no time for
wearing the shallow mask of manners. When I see a spade I call it a spade.
Gwendolen [satirically]: I am glad to say that I have never seen a spade. It is obvious that our social spheres have
been widely different.
[Enter Merriman, followed by the footman. He carries a salver, table cloth, and plate stand. Cecily is about to retort.
The presence of the servants exercises a restraining influence, under which both girls chafe.]
Merriman: Shall I lay tea here as usual, Miss?
Cecily [sternly, in a calm voice]: Yes, as usual. [Merriman begins to clear table and lay cloth. A long pause. Cecily and
Gwendolen glare at each other.]
Gwendolen: Are there many interesting walks in the vicinity, Miss Cardew?
Cecily: Oh! yes! a great many. From the top of one of the hills quite close one can see five counties.
Gwendolen: Five counties! I don’t think I should like that; I hate crowds.
Cecily [sweetly]: I suppose that is why you live in town? [Gwendolen bites her lip, and beats her foot nervously with
her parasol.]
Gwendolen: [Looking round.] Quite a well-kept garden this is, Miss Cardew.
Cecily: So glad you like it, Miss Fairfax.
Gwendolen: I had no idea there were any flowers in the country.
Cecily: Oh, flowers are as common here, Miss Fairfax, as people are in London.
Gwendolen: Personally I cannot understand how anybody manages to exist in the country, if anybody who is anybody
does. The country always bores me to death.
Cecily: Ah! This is what the newspapers call agricultural depression, is it not? I believe the aristocracy are suffering
very much from it just at present. It is almost an epidemic amongst them, I have been told. May I offer you some tea,
Miss Fairfax?
Gwendolen [with elaborate politeness]: Thank you. [Aside.] Detestable girl! But I require tea!
Cecily [sweetly]: Sugar?
Gwendolen [superciliously]: No, thank you. Sugar is not fashionable any more. [Cecily looks angrily at her, takes up
the tongs and puts four lumps of sugar into the cup.]
Cecily [severely]: Cake or bread and butter?
Gwendolen [in a bored manner]: Bread and butter, please. Cake is rarely seen at the best houses nowadays.
Cecily [cuts a very large slice of cake, and puts it on the tray]: Hand that to Miss Fairfax.
[Merriman does so, and goes out with footman. Gwendolen drinks the tea and makes a grimace. Puts down cup at
once, reaches out her hand to the bread and butter, looks at it, and finds it is cake. Rises in indignation.]
Gwendolen: You have filled my tea with lumps of sugar, and though I asked most distinctly for bread and butter, you
have given me cake. I am known for the gentleness of my disposition, and the extraordinary sweetness of my nature,
but I warn you, Miss Cardew, you may go too far.
Cecily [rising]: To save my poor, innocent, trusting boy from the machinations of any other girl there are no lengths to
which I would not go.
Gwendolen: From the moment I saw you I distrusted you. I felt that you were false and deceitful. I am never deceived
in such matters. My first impressions of people are invariably right.
Cecily: It seems to me, Miss Fairfax, that I am trespassing on your valuable time. No doubt you have many other calls
of a similar character to make in the neighbourhood.