From “Fire! Fire! In the city…”
In an apartment house, a breeze has blown a towel up into the flame of a hot stove. A fire begins. The smoke alarm
screams.
A phone call alerts the fire-dispatch center. Instantly, a dispatcher calls the firehouse nearest the fire.
A loudspeaker blares out the address of the fire, and the firefighters go into action. They slide down brass poles to
the ground floor, where the fire engines are, and hurry into their fire-fighting gear. Then they take their positions on
their engines.
The big trucks roar out of the firehouse. Sirens scream and lights flash.
The fire engines arrive at the scene. The fire is bigger now. The fire chief is in charge. He decides the best way to
fight this fire.
Hoses are pulled from the trucks. Each separate fire truck is called a “company.” Each separate company has an officer
in charge. The fire chief tells each officer in charge what he wants the firefighters to do.
Firefighters are ordered to search the building to make sure no one is still inside. A man is trapped. A ladder tower is
swung into action. The man is rescued quickly.
At the same time, an aerial ladder is taking other firefighters to the floor above the fire. Inside, the firefighters attach
a hose to the building’s standpipe. Water is sprayed onto the fire to keep it from moving up through the apartment
house.
Now the aerial ladder is swung over to the roof of the burning building. Firefighters break holes in the roof and windows
to let out poisonous gases, heat, and smoke before they can cause a bad explosion. There’s less danger now for
the firefighters working inside the building.
Firefighters are battling the blaze from the outside of the building, too. Fire hoses carry water from the fire hydrants
to the trucks.
Pumps in the fire trucks control the water pressure and push the water up through the discharge hoses. Streams of
water hit the burning building and buildings next door to keep the fire from spreading.
The fire is under control.
The fire is out. The firefighters clean up the rubble. Back at the firehouse, they clean their equipment and make an
official report on the fire.